{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2818
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red245\green245\blue245;\red0\green0\blue0;\red144\green1\blue18;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c96863\c96863\c96863;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c63922\c8235\c8235;
}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww24300\viewh11220\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \cb2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec3 This document provides a comprehensive overview of the livestock data processing and aggregation pipeline. The livestock data is sourced from Harvard Dataverse for 2010 and 2015, and from FAO for 2020. Detailed sources are provided below:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 Data Sources:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 2010 Livestock Data: Harvard Dataverse\cb1 \
\cb2 2015 Livestock Data: Harvard Dataverse\cb1 \
\cb2 2020 Livestock Data: FAO Livestock Systems\cb1 \
\
\cb2 2010 data source:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=doi:10.7910/DVN/GIVQ75\cb1 \
\
\cb2 2015 data source:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=doi:10.7910/DVN/LHBICE\cb1 \
\
\cb2 2020 data soruce:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 https://data.apps.fao.org/catalog//iso/9d1e149b-d63f-4213-978b-317a8eb42d02\cb1 \
\
\
\cb2 Coordinate System: All datasets use the geographic coordinate system EPSG:4326.  Both livestock coordinate and shapefiles coordinates are aligned for this data aggregations.\cb1 \
\
\cb2 Resolution: The data processing was carried out at a spatial resolution of 0.0083333 degrees (approximately 1 km at the equator), with aggregation to 0.083333 degrees (approximately 10 km at the equator) for distribution. This multi-scale approach accounts for spatial variability in data resolution, enhancing the accuracy of livestock distribution analysis. \cf4 \strokec4 [Source: Harvard Dataverse documentation for livestock datasets]\cf0 \cb1 \strokec3 \
\
\cb2 Data Processing Steps\cb1 \
\cb2 Data Extraction and Interpretation:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 For 2010 and 2015 datasets, each pixel\'92s Digital Number (DN) value represents the total number of livestock within that pixel\'92s geographical extent. Therefore, the DN values directly correspond to livestock counts for these years.\cb1 \
\cb2 For the 2020 dataset, however, the DN value represents livestock density (livestock per square kilometer). To convert this to absolute livestock counts, each pixel's DN value is multiplied by its area in square kilometers, calculated based on the pixel's geographic size.\cb1 \
\cb2 Handling No-Data Values:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 Each dataset includes specific no-data indicators (DN values representing missing or invalid data) as documented in the metadata. These no-data values are identified and excluded during processing to ensure that only valid livestock counts are included in the analysis.\cb1 \
\cb2 Geospatial Masking and Boundary Definition:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 U.S. county boundaries were obtained from the U.S. Census Bureau\'92s county shapefiles. These boundaries were used to mask the datasets, restricting the data collection to within the boundaries of the United States.\cb1 \
\cb2 For each livestock dataset, the U.S. county shapefile was applied as a mask, ensuring that only livestock counts within the continental U.S., Alaska, and Hawaii were included.\cb1 \
\cb2 Aggregation at Different Administrative Levels:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 County-Level Aggregation: For each county, pixel-level DN values were summed to obtain the total livestock count per county. Each pixel within a county boundary contributes to the aggregate count for that specific county.\cb1 \
\cb2 State-Level Aggregation: Using a similar approach, livestock data was aggregated at the state level by applying a state shapefile as a mask and summing pixel values within each state boundary.\cb1 \
\cb2 ZIP Code-Level Aggregation: ZIP code-level aggregation was also performed by using a ZIP code shapefile as a mask. This provides an additional layer of granularity for data analysis.\cb1 \
\cb2 Verification and Validation:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 Multiple validation checks were performed throughout the data processing to ensure accuracy. Visual checks were conducted at various stages to compare the output against the original dataset\'92s visual representation, ensuring that spatial distribution patterns were preserved.\cb1 \
\cb2 For county data, totals were compared with expected patterns to verify that data aggregation aligned correctly with each administrative boundary.\cb1 \
\cb2 Direct Pixel-Level Verification:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 To verify the accuracy of the data extraction, a subset of pixel-level data was processed directly without aggregation, enabling visual comparison with the original rasters. This step confirmed that livestock counts and densities were being read and processed correctly for each year.\cb1 \
\cb2 Visualization:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 Visualizations were generated at multiple stages to validate data integrity and alignment. Various scaling methods were applied to accommodate different ranges of livestock densities, ensuring that high-density areas were distinguishable in the output maps.\cb1 \
\cb2 Final Output\cb1 \
\cb2 The processed livestock data is aggregated at three administrative levels:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 State-Level: Aggregated total livestock count by state.\cb1 \
\cb2 County-Level: Aggregated total livestock count by county.\cb1 \
\cb2 ZIP Code-Level: Aggregated total livestock count by ZIP code.\cb1 \
\cb2 Additionally, a direct pixel-based dataset was created, providing livestock counts and densities at each individual pixel, allowing for more granular analysis.\cb1 \
\
\cb2 Each output dataset is stored in CSV format, with columns indicating latitude, longitude, and livestock counts for each livestock type (e.g., chicken, cattle, pig) across the years 2010, 2015, and 2020. The 2020 data specifically includes adjustments for density-to-count conversion, and all datasets maintain consistency in coordinate systems and no-data handling.\cb1 \
\
\cb2 This processed dataset serves as a comprehensive resource for analyzing livestock distribution trends across multiple years at varying administrative levels.\cb1 \
\
\
\
\
\cb2 This document outlines the steps taken to merge livestock data with life expectancy data at the county level, creating a comprehensive dataset that is well-prepared for machine learning (ML) applications. The primary objective of this work is to align the datasets in a structured format, enabling exploratory data analysis and machine learning, with a focus on understanding trends and potential correlations between livestock density and life expectancy at a granular level.\cb1 \
\
\cb2 Data Sources:\cb1 \
\cb2 Life Expectancy Data (2000-2019)\cb1 \
\
\cb2 Source: IHME Data - United States Causes of Death and Life Expectancy by County, Race, and Ethnicity\cb1 \
\cb2 This dataset provides life expectancy data at the county level, broken down by race, ethnicity, and other demographic factors. Data is structured annually from 2000 to 2019 and is identified by unique county FIPS codes.\cb1 \
\cb2 Livestock Data (2010, 2015, and 2020)\cb1 \
\
\cb2 Life Ex data set\cb1 \
\cb2 https://ghdx.healthdata.org/record/ihme-data/united-states-causes-death-life-expectancy-by-county-race-ethnicity-2000-2019\cb1 \
\
\cb2 2010 data source:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=doi:10.7910/DVN/GIVQ75\cb1 \
\
\cb2 2015 data source:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=doi:10.7910/DVN/LHBICE\cb1 \
\
\cb2 2020 data soruce:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 https://data.apps.fao.org/catalog//iso/9d1e149b-d63f-4213-978b-317a8eb42d02\cb1 \
\cb2 The livestock data includes various livestock types (e.g., cattle, chickens, pigs) across multiple years. It is geospatially structured with county-level granularity and includes the Digital Number (DN) for each pixel, representing livestock counts (2010 and 2015) or density (2020). All datasets are provided in the EPSG:4326 coordinate system.\cb1 \
\cb2 Data Processing and Transformation Steps:\cb1 \
\cb2 Transformation of Livestock Data:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 Data Format Transformation:\cb1 \
\cb2 The livestock dataset was restructured into a uniform, followable format to facilitate merging with life expectancy data. This included aggregating livestock counts at the county level using the county FIPS code as the unique identifier.\cb1 \
\cb2 Handling Density Data for 2020:\cb1 \
\cb2 For 2020, the DN values represent livestock density (number per square kilometer) rather than raw counts. Therefore, each DN value was converted to livestock count by multiplying it by the pixel area in square kilometers.\cb1 \
\cb2 No-Data Handling:\cb1 \
\cb2 The livestock datasets contain specific no-data values, which were removed based on metadata information for each year. This ensures that only valid data is included in the merged dataset.\cb1 \
\cb2 Aggregation and Summing:\cb1 \
\cb2 For each year, pixel values within each county were summed to derive total livestock counts. This was repeated for each livestock type (e.g., cattle, chickens, pigs) to ensure that data was available in a structured manner for machine learning applications.\cb1 \
\cb2 Preparation of Life Expectancy Data:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 Alignment with County FIPS:\cb1 \
\cb2 The life expectancy dataset, which spans 2000-2019, uses county FIPS codes for unique identification. This key was aligned with the livestock dataset for accurate merging.\cb1 \
\cb2 Data Transformation:\cb1 \
\cb2 Life expectancy data was transformed and aggregated as necessary to match the time intervals of the livestock data. For example, if livestock data was available every five years (2010, 2015, and 2020), the life expectancy data was filtered or interpolated to align with these years.\cb1 \
\cb2 Yearly Data Verification:\cb1 \
\cb2 Several checks were performed at each step to verify that the transformations were accurate and that no data was lost during aggregation.\cb1 \
\cb2 Merging Datasets:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 Joining by FIPS Code:\cb1 \
\cb2 Both datasets were merged based on the unique FIPS code for each county. This allowed for a precise match between life expectancy values and livestock counts in each county.\cb1 \
\cb2 Yearly Alignment:\cb1 \
\cb2 The merged dataset was structured to maintain a consistent time-series format, aligning livestock and life expectancy data by year. This alignment ensures that each county has livestock and life expectancy data for each available year, facilitating temporal analysis.\cb1 \
\cb2 Data Validation:\cb1 \
\cb2 After merging, multiple validation checks were conducted to ensure that data points were correctly aligned across years and that values were reasonable. This included cross-checking a sample of counties to ensure that livestock totals and life expectancy values were accurately represented.\cb1 \
\cb2 Preliminary Machine Learning Experiments:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 Initial Machine Learning Models:\cb1 \
\cb2 Some basic machine learning models (e.g., linear regression, decision trees) were applied as exploratory analyses. These initial experiments aimed to test the predictive capability of livestock data for estimating life expectancy trends and to identify potential data transformations needed for more robust modeling.\cb1 \
\cb2 Focus on Data Preparation:\cb1 \
\cb2 The primary focus of this stage was on dataset preparation and not on extensive model building. As a result, the models were intended as preliminary checks to validate the dataset\'92s structure and quality rather than to provide actionable insights. Advanced machine learning work is planned as a subsequent step, now that the dataset is verified.\cb1 \
\cb2 Final Dataset Structure:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 The final merged dataset includes columns for:\cb1 \
\cb2 County FIPS Code: Unique identifier for each county.\cb1 \
\cb2 Year: Year of the data point (aligned for livestock and life expectancy).\cb1 \
\cb2 Life Expectancy Metrics: Life expectancy values, with breakdowns by race and ethnicity where available.\cb1 \
\cb2 Livestock Counts: Total counts for each livestock type (cattle, chickens, pigs, etc.) for each year.\cb1 \
\cb2 Additional Coordinates: Latitude and longitude were retained where relevant for geospatial analyses.\cb1 \
\cb2 This dataset is now structured to facilitate both machine learning applications and detailed exploratory data analysis. It serves as a unified source for studying correlations between livestock density and public health indicators at the county level.\cb1 \
\cb2 Visual Validation and Scaling:\cb1 \
\
\cb2 Scaled Visuals: Visualizations were created using various scaling methods to accurately represent the distribution of livestock and life expectancy data across counties. These visual checks helped verify that data was aligned correctly and that aggregation methods maintained geographic and demographic fidelity.\cb1 \
\cb2 Map Overlays: Additional maps with state and county boundaries were layered over livestock data to confirm the spatial accuracy of the merged dataset.\cb1 \
\cb2 Summary\cb1 \
\cb2 This data preparation and merging process has produced a robust, well-structured dataset that combines livestock counts and life expectancy metrics across U.S. counties from 2010 to 2020. By aligning livestock and life expectancy data with consistent FIPS codes and annual time stamps, this dataset is ready for advanced analysis, including predictive modeling and machine learning. Further machine learning efforts are planned, with the prepared dataset providing a reliable foundation for exploring the relationship between livestock density and life expectancy at a fine spatial and temporal scale.\cb1 \
}